---
layout: post
title: "The Lost Art of Damascus Steel and Artificial Intelligence #in..."
description: "The Lost Art of Damascus Steel and Artificial Intelligence"
date: 2025-08-15
tags: [entrepiernurs, artificialintelligence]
draft: true
---

Let's talk about Damascus steel and why it has to do with artificial intelligence. Damascus steel is a type of steel that, according to legend, had a razor-sharp edge. It was made from 900 to 1700 AD. After that, they simply stopped making it. Even today, there are still steelworkers trying to figure out how to make it, and there are techniques that replicate it, but it's not Damascus steel. Something similar happened with hand-forged concrete. Like Roman concrete, it's very old and doesn't have a crack. You can go there and not see a single crack in that concrete. And it's a lost art. So there are many things throughout history that are techniques that have become lost art. With this idea of ​​intelligence, everyone will be confused if they don't learn, because there's no point in learning, if intelligence is going to be everything. Ah! But, what if programming becomes a lost art? If in the future everyone is doing artificial intelligence, but nobody knows how computers work, we'll keep using computers. If nobody knows how they work or how to fix them, we'll keep writing programs. If nobody knows how things work, we'll make things better or worse if we don't know how they work. That's what they're doing. Don't these fans realize, these people who say that artificial intelligence is going to replace everything, and if the knowledge of how things are done is lost, that's the risk. That's why we have to keep saying, no, it's not true, maybe it can be improved with intelligence, but we shouldn't say don't learn. Saying don't learn something because nobody is going to use it anymore, because intelligence is going to be everything, it's going to be this. Today nobody knows how to do this, today not even a government dares to do anything with what was recently discovered to be the reason why Roman concrete or Masco steel worked, so learn, don't listen to your podcasters who say, no, you don't learn, that we should stop programming, that's not the point, we don't want these things in the future.
